---
image: /images/uploads/humpback_whale.jpg
title: Humpback Whale
scientific: Megaptera novaeangliae
lifespan: 50 years
size: 18 meters (60 ft) long, 40 tons
distribution: Global, every ocean
---

The Humpback whale is one of the more distinctive whales on the planet, because of the way it looks and for the haunting melodies these animals produce. They are black on the dorsal side, with white or mottled black and white undersides. They have the longest “arms” in the world, with their flippers growing to around 16 feet (their genus name, Megaptera, means “big-wing”). Their name comes from the deep arch that forms on their back when the animals are diving. They have a broad, rounded head that is covered in knobs, or tubercles. They shape and color pattern of the dorsal fin and tail fluke is unique to each individual, acting as an easy identifier, much like a fingerprint. 

Humpbacks are baleen whales, meaning they have rows of long, thin keratin plates, called baleen, that they use live a sieve to capture prey. They take in large gulps of water and food, then use their massive tongue to push the water out through the baleen, trapping the food. They are technically an omnivore, since their diet is made up of small fish, krill, and plankton. They are known to work cooperatively with other humpbacks in a process called bubble feeding, where the group dives below the school of prey and swims in a circle while blowing bubbles out of their blowholes. The food is trapped in the middle, and the whales will all rise up together with their mouths open, engulfing whatever is available.

Like many whale species, humpbacks make a yearly migration, often traveling over 10,000 miles between feeding grounds in the Arctic and Antarctic and breeding grounds near the equator. For years, it was believed this was the longest migration of a marine mammal, but recent tracking of gray whales shows they may undertake a longer one. The humpbacks in southeast Alaska will travel to Hawaii or Mexico in the winter time to give birth and mate. Not much is known about the journey itself, but it is believed the animals don’t eat while traveling, and they don’t eat at all at the mating grounds. This makes their time in the summer feeding grounds that much more important, since it must sustain them for the rest of the year.

During the 19th and first half of the 20th centuries, humpback whales were hunted to the brink of extinction. It is estimated that about 200,000 animals were taken in the 20th century alone, bringing global population numbers to about 5,000 (it was much lower in some regional areas). The International Whaling Commission was founded in 1946 to oversee the whaling industry, and they imposed a ban on humpback whale hunting in 1966. The Marine Mammal Protection Act, 1972, and the Endangered Species Act, 1973, gave further protections to humpbacks around the United States. Since these protections were enacted, the populations have rebounded, to between 40,000-60,000, but there is still a limited take of these animals in some countries.